Add beginner content (#191)
nanoframework/nanoframework.github.io: content/getting-started-guides/gpio-explained.md

# All what you've always wanted to know about GPIO

This beginner document will explain what is GPIO and how to properly use it with concrete examples using .NET nanoFramework. You're in the perfect place if pull-up, pull-down seems like weird words for you. You're also in the good place if physical pin out and logical pin out needs a bit more clarity.

## A bit of theory

GPIO stands for "General Purpose Input/Output." In simple terms, [GPIO](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General-purpose_input/output) refers to a set of pins on a microcontroller (MCU) or a computer that can be programmed to either input or output signals. These signals can be used to communicate with and control other devices or components in an embedded system.

- General Purpose: These pins can be configured by the user or programmer for various tasks. They're not dedicated to one specific function but can be adapted for different purposes based on the needs of the system.

> - Input/Output: GPIO pins can either receive information (input) from external devices or send out information (output) to control external components. For instance, an input GPIO pin can detect whether a button is pressed or not, while an output GPIO pin can send a signal to turn on an LED or control a motor.

Reviewer: If it's for beginners I would place something like:
"NOTE! Gpio pins are able to deliver low current. Connecting high demand devices may lead to destroy them"

In embedded systems, GPIO pins are versatile. They're used for a wide range of tasks, including reading sensors, interfacing with buttons or switches, controlling LEDs, motors, and communicating with other devices like displays or communication modules.

Programmers can write code to configure these GPIO pins based on the specific requirements of their project. By manipulating these pins through code, developers can create complex functions and interactions within an embedded system. Those GPIO pins are used as a base for other higher level protocols like SPI, I2C, Serial and more!.

Overall, GPIO provides a flexible way to interact with the physical world by allowing a microcontroller to interface with various external devices and components in an embedded system.

> ## A bit of electronic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## A bit of electronics theory
```

One of the most important law in electronic is the [Ohms law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohm%27s_law). The law is quite simple:

`V = R x I`

Where:

- `V` = voltage in Volt (V)
- `R` = resistor in Ohms
- `I` = intensity in Amperes (A)

> Seems like useless but it's what really matter when you connect elements together.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Seems like useless but it's what really matter when you connect the elements together.
```

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > Playing with electricity is sensitive for MCU, the maximum voltage is a real maximum voltage, go over and you'll damage the pin and possibly the MCU

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Playing with electricity is sensitive for MCU, the maximum voltage is a real maximum voltage, go over and you'll damage the pin and possibly the MCU
```
```suggestion
> Playing with electricity is sensitive for MCU, the maximum voltage is a real maximum voltage, go over and you'll damage the pin and possibly the MCU.
```

> > Check in the documentation what is the maximum level of the pin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Check in the documentation what is the maximum voltage the pins are tolerant to.
```

> ESP32, STM32 and most MCU are 3.3V, some can be 1.8V and some even tolerant to higher voltages like 5V, meaning that they are 3.3V but you can apply in their input 5V (sometimes more) and they'll be perfectly fine!

Also, few terms we will use:

- Ground = 0V = 0 = Low
- VCC = +Power, can be +5V, more often in MCU world +3.3V = 1 = High

> ## Controlling a led with GPIO a bit more theory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Controlling a LED with GPIO a bit more theory
```

> The basic hello world in the embedded space is blinking a led. For this, we need a bit of electronic knowledge and some hardware:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The basic hello world in the embedded space is blinking a LED. For this, we need a bit of electronic knowledge and some hardware:
```

- 1 GPIO pin available as output on a MCU

> - 1 Led

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 1 LED
```

Reviewer 2: There are other instances of _led_ in low caps in the text below.

- 1 Resistor

And here is how look like the electronic schema, we will take the assumption our MCU provides 3.3V:

![R and a led to ground](../../images/getting-started/gpio-pin-schema.png)

Each electronic component has a limit either in terms ov voltage you can apply/it can handle, either in terms of intensity or both. That is the case for any led. It does vary a bit depending on the led and its color but overall, 1 led is approximately 2 V and can handle a current of 0,02 A maximum.

> Applying the Ohms law: `R = (3,3 - 2)/0,02 = 65 Ohms`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Applying Ohm's law: `R = (3,3 - 2)/0,02 = 65 Ohms`
```
